# PNII: Olfactory System (2018-02-05, Ragsdale)
**See [pnii_2018_02_05_rdm.md](pnii_2018_02_05_rdm.md) for RDM's take on lecture**

* Chemosensation is the most ancient and ubiquitous sense.  
* The relative value / resources for olfaction (and chemosensation, generally) differ by species; i.e., humans vs rats.  

* Olfactory transduction takes place within the olfactory epithelium, a small (1-2 cm2) patch of cells located in the nasal cavity  
* Olfactory receptor neurons project from the epithelium to the olfactory bulb, forming cranial nerve I.  
* Olfactory receptors are bipolar neurons. Their dendrites project cilia into the mucosa.  
    * The mucosa is secreted by accompanying epithelial cells and Bowman’s glands.  
* Odorants from the environment dissolve into the mucosa, possibly interact with odorant binding proteins, and activate receptors on the cilia of the olfactory receptor neurons.  
* Olfactory sensory neurons turnover every few months. Makes sense, since these are neurons that are exposed to the external environment.
    * As you get older, they don’t turn over as well-- leading to decrease in sense of smell.  
* Odorants evoke depolarization of the receptor cell, resulting in action potentials that are propagated along axons to the olfactory bulb.  
* Olfactory receptor proteins are G-protein coupled receptors.  
* When they bind odorant molecules, the receptors get activated, which activates the G-protein, which activates the Adenylyl cyclase, which generates cAMP to activate a cation channel to allow for depolarization.  
    * As an aside, in the case of photoreceptors, ion channels are open in the dark but light causes cGMP to be degraded and causes the cGMP-gated ion channels to close and the membrane hyperpolarizes.  
* The olfactory system is designed to interpret the inputs from olfactory cells in a combinatorial fashion-- possible since odorants are complex organic chemicals with many different moieties (a fancy word for functional groups!).  
* Axons of receptor neurons terminate in distinctive structures in the olfactory bulb called glomeruli. Most synapses are on projection neurons called mitral cells.  
* Each olfactory sensory neurons is thought to only express one type of molecular receptors. Conversely, a singly glomerulus receives input from multiple sensory neurons and all express the same receptor type.  
* It’s not the job of the olfactory system to localize an odor, but to determine the odor’s existence; therefore, the sensory neurons are not organized by type of receptor in the epithelium.  
* The olfactory system is a nice model system for axon pathfinding, because of this tight match between diffuse olfactory sensory neuron axons to find specific mitral cells or glomeruli.  
* There is also a “somatotopic” map in the olfactory bulb; importantly, it is not a map of location but of quality / kind.  
* Axons of mitral cells project through the lateral olfactory tract directly to cortex; specifically to primary olfactory cortex, the medial nucleus of the amygdala, and the entorhinal cortex.  
* Odorants that differ in perceptual quality evoke distributed and overlapping (but unique!) fMRI patterns in primary olfactory cortex.
Primary olfactory cortex projects to OFC, both directly as well as indirectly (through the medial dorsal thalamus).  
* OFC involved in the combination of olfaction with other senses (gustatory and somatic) to produce tastes.  
* Last slide shows a few of the central pathways in the olfactory system (e.g., olfactory bulb -> olfactory cortex -> OFC).
