# PNII: *Sensory Systems II* / Visual System I (2018-01-22, Ragsdale)
**See [pnii_2018_01_22_rdm.md](pnii_2018_01_22_rdm.md) for notes on _Visual System I_**

* Dorsal column forms two distinct tracts: *fasciculus gracilis* (lower body) and *fasciculus cuneatus* (upper body)
* The anterolateral pathway moves along the spinothalamic tract, carrying pain and temperature information
* The caudal part of the brainstem is called the medulla, carries ascending somatic sensory tracts.
* *Nucleus cuneatus* is the second synapse in the pathway, in caudal medulla. *Nucleus gracilis* is also at this level.
* In the rostral medulla, spinal cord starts to flatten, creating 4th ventricle. The *medial lemniscus* is a fiber tract replacing the two nuclei from the caudal medulla. By the medial lemniscus, fibers have crossed over (i.e., fibers on the right represent the left side of the body) but retain homotopic organization on each side (i.e., top of body representing on one end, bottom on other).
* As you move into the pons, the medial lemniscus changes orientation to flatten out.
* In the midbrain, the cerebral aqueduct exists and connects the 4th and 3rd ventricle
* Different synaptic relays transform the sensory input to some degree when ascending up the spinal pathways.
    * Two important ideas here are convergence and divergence of information across neurons.
    * A third idea is lateral inhibition, which enhances the SNR via local inhibitory neurons.
* Sensory information passes through the thalamus to reach the cortex (although the olfactory system can avoid the thalamus relay).
* The thalamus is organized as discrete nuclei of three distinct types: (1) specific relay, (2) association, and (3) nonspecific, where:
    * *Specific relay nuclei* relay mainly sensory information to the cortex; e.g., the ventral posterior lateral (VPL) nucleus relays somatic sensory input to primary sensory cortex; Lateral Geniculate Nucleus (LGN) relays to primary visual cortex
    * *Association nuclei* (e.g., the *pulvinar* and the *medial dorsal* nucleus) connect to association cortex (connect to temporoparietal cortex and prefrontal cortex, respectively).
    * *Nonspecific nuclei* project diffusely to many regions of cortex (e.g., the *internal medullary lamina* contains *intralaminar* nuclei which project throughout cortex). Maybe be partially involved in maintaining arousal.
* There are also reciprocal connections from cortex to the thalamus (e.g., from primary visual cortex to the LGN). It turns out there are almost 10x as many feedback connections from cortex to thalamus as there are feedforward or driver projections (from thalamus to cortex).
    * These feedback connections may modulate how information flows through the thalamus, though this is an area of active research.
* Modulatory projections need not only be feedback, they can also be lateral (e.g., Brainstem Ach, NE projection to LGN).
* Thalamic neurons exist in two different states: transmission mode and bursting mode, seen in wakefulness and slow wave sleep, respectively.
* The neurons switch between these two different modes via shifts in their membrane potentials. When hyperpolarized, transmission mode. When depolarized, bursting mode.
* Cortex is thin, 2-4mm thick. Surface area of human cortex is a bit less than a squared meter. Most of cortex is 6 layers, where different layers have names reflecting the cell types in that layer.
    * Layer IV (*internal granule* layer) is the input layer of cortex.
    * Layers II, III, and V and “output” layers, all contain the characteristic pyramidal cells.  Layers II and III project to other areas of cortex, Layer V to subcortex.
* Cortex is organized into distinct vertical, functional columns (at least some regions of cortex). Acts as a functional module. Columns are interconnected through horizontal connections.
* Higher order sensory cortex exists, deals with more integrated and abstract aspects of perception.
* Damage to right parietal lobe (as higher order association cortex) can lead to complex disorders of perception, attention, e.g. neglect syndrome.
* Final point re: sensory systems: Sensation is an abstraction, not replication, of the real world !
