# PNII: Sensory Systems I (2018-01-15, Ragsdale)

* The working hypothesis of much of neuroscience: The brain is an information processing machine, but information itself isn’t a physical thing.
    * This is best demonstrated by the non-intuitive nature of consciousness (as compared to the intuitive nature of motor reflexes e.g., in response to losing balance).
    * This information processing is relevant at a multiscale perspective (e.g., neurons, neuronal populations, areas, networks…).
* This multiscale perspective is also seen in the reductionist bias of neuroscience.
    * Charles Sherrington argued that complex movements like walking are built up from fundamental building blocks like reflexes
        * This hypothesis turned out to be incorrect...
* David Marr proposed three levels at which information processing theory can be carried out:
    1. *Hardware implementation*: what is the actual physical "stuff" that implements the information processing?
    2. *Representation and algorithm*: what is the representation for the input and output and what is the algorithm for their transformation?
    3. *Computational theory*: what is the system trying to accomplish?
        * E.g., "trying to understand perception by studying only neurons is like trying to understand bird flight by studying only feathers."
* One of the problems with Marr’s proposal is the definition of the system-- is it the whole brain? Is it subsystems within the brain?
* What does it mean "to see"? Interpretation
    1. Your brain taking electromagnetic radiation from the environment and using it to construct a *model* of the external world that allows you to interact with it. Interpretation
    2. You can detect different colors
* Sensory information has four functions:
    1. perception
    2. controlling movement
    3. regulating internal organism
    4. maintaining arousal
* Different sensory modalities share common features-- see 7 points on slide.
* Somatic sensory system: each specific kind of ending extracts a specific kind of information, and then sends that information through a specific pathway and into the central nervous system (i.e., the idea of the labeled line).
* However, perceived sensations are caused by activation of multiple receptor types and integrated across their parallel channels.
* Each neuron innervates a specific region in which it is sensitive to external stimuli (or previous elements in the information processing hierarchy), known as a receptive field.
* Receptive fields are not all the same size-- see point from lecture one about the existence of homunculi; e.g., receptive fields of palms are larger than those of fingertips.

#### Elizabeth stopped paying attention here
* Dorsal root ganglion ! Dorsal horn ! Again !  
    * Oh God, the spinal cord’s anatomy. Is so painful. But I need to re-learn it, I guess….
* Tracing both fine touch / vibration and pain / temperature through their two systems (the dorsal column-medial lemniscal system and the anterolateral system, respectively)....
* Dorsal columns and anteriolateral columns are somatotopically organized !
