# PNII: History of Systems Neuroscience (2018-01-08, Rochford)

* Ancient philosophers localized the dualist concept of 'mind' in the heart. Starting with Hippocrates, the 'mind' was moved to the brain.
* Galen (a Roman physician) discovered the rete mirabile when dissecting a cow brain; argued the 'mind' lives there due to its structural intricacy.
* Humans, however, do not have a rete mirabile; instead, we have a circle of Willis.
    * Clearly, then, the 'mind' cannot live there.
* In the middle ages, the Cell Doctrine was developed.
    * Posits that the 'mind' is immaterial, but lives inside the ventricles (as 'empty spaces' in the brain)
    * Different localizations of specific functions to different parts of the ventricles
* For Aristotle, 'common sense' was integrating different senses into a common percept.
* Willis, a king's physician in the 1600s, was able to link behavioral changes following brain injuries via post-mortem autopsies. Posited that striatum involved in voluntary movement, corpus callosum in imagination, cortex in memory, cerebellum in involuntary movement.
    * Willis, however, argued that not all functions can be localized to a biological substrate. #dualism
* Franz Joseph Gall (early 1800s) argued that all functions of the 'mind' can be localized to the brain. Developed phrenology to aid in localization efforts.
* Pierre Flourens (early to mid-1800s) vehemently opposed phrenology's division of the brain as he believed that the 'mind' cannot be dissociated into constituent parts; it must be considered as a whole. This is stemming from Cartesian philosophy.
* Flourens tried experimental ablation; showed that after ablation a bird's “intelligence and will have disappeared, yet... movement persist[s].” Therefore argued that volition is spread throughout the entire cortex rather than localized.
* Gall's theory was invalidated as its primary measurement (skull shape) did not strongly correlate with his intended measurement (brain shape)
    * He also showed strongly selective interpretation of data.
    * Further, he showed nominal fallacy; that is, to name something is to prove it exists, and explains it.
* Flourens overinterpreted his available evidence, held Descartes's ideals as infallible, and did not have very specific ablation techniques-- but made very specific interpretations.
* Gall's program was the first true scientific program to identify and account for individual differences.
* Localization was reborn with Broca's work. One push away was Carl Lashley's work suggesting that memory was not localized but distributed throughout cortex.
* Wilder Penfield mapped out sensory and motor homunculi… noted it since we are “in the house that Penfield built.”
