# PNII: History of Systems Neuroscience (2018-01-08, Rochford)
**See [1](../lecture_notes/pnii_2018_01_08_emd.md) for lecture notes on this topic.**

Chapter 1 is required.

## Chapter 1: The brain and behavior

Neural science must continually confront certain fundamental questions.
Using language as a model, this chapter examines questions including:
* Is function localized to specific regions?
* What is the relationship between regions in generating complex functions?
* Are these relationships best understood at a cellular or areal level?

### Two opposing views have been advanced on the relationship between brain and behavior

Current understanding of the brain emerged from five academic disciplines:
1. Anatomy: Ramón y Cajal used the Golgi method to stain nerve cells; developed the *neuron doctrine*
2. Embryology: confirmed the existence of the *growth cone* which leads developing axons to their targets
3. Physiology: nerve cells produce electricity, and measured the speed of conduction along an axon.
4. Pharmacology: drugs bind to discrete receptors located on the surface membrane of the cell.
5. Psychology: dualism tradition; Kant later advocated that our perception of the world is determined by inherent features of our mind / brain.  

<br>

Gall joined biological and psychological conceptions of behavior in the study of phrenology.

Flourens used lesion studies in animals to argue that function was instead distributed throughout cortex, rather than localized as Gall had claimed.
This came to be known as a *holistic* view of brain function and was supported by established religious traditions.

Work by Broca and Wernicke challenged the holistic view, and Charles Sherrington extended their localization approach to the cellular level to champion a view known as *cellular connectionism*.

### The brain has distinct functional regions

The brain comprises seven major structures:
1. Medulla oblongata
2. Pons
3. Cerebellum
4. Midbrain
5. Diencephalon, and
6. Cerebrum

The cerebrum, specifically the cerebral cortex, supports operations responsible for our complex cognitive abilities. Two important features characterize the organization of the cerebral cortex:
1. Each hemisphere is concerned primarily with sensory and motor processes on the contralateral side of the body.
2. Although similar in appearance, the two hemispheres are neither completely symmetrical in structure nor equivalent in function.

### The first strong evidence for localization of cognitive abilities came from studies of language disorders

Broca founded neuropsychology based on insights from patients with brain lesions and related cognitive deficits.

Building on this insight and separate studies of lesions in an adjacent area, Wernicke proposed a neural model of language that advanced the idea of *distributed processing*, wherein different components of a single behavior are processed in several regions of the brain.

Inspired by this work, Brodmann advanced an understanding of localization based on *cytoarchitectonic features* of areas, distinguishing 52 functional areas.

Lashley, however, led an alternative school of thought that it was the size of a lesion, not its location, that impacted neural function. He proposed a theory of *mass action* wherein the full mass of the brain, not its regional components, are crucial to function.

Eventually, however, the evidence for functional localization became overwhelming, with studies such as those by Penfield stimulating functional areas in epilepsy patients and seeing altered functional responses.

Subsequent work in fMRI samples continues to support this idea.

### Affective states are also mediated by local, specialized systems in the brain

Emotions were believed to be the expression of whole-brain activity, even after cognitive processes such as language were accepted to arise from discrete systems.

Evidence from lesion and stimulation studies, however, confirms that emotion, too, is mediated by discrete systems.

Damage to right hemisphere language areas impacts the perception and expression of emotional content in language.

Patients with temporal lobe epilepsy show distinct emotional changes at seizure onset, including feelings of unreality and fear or anger.
During inter-ictal periods, these patients also show sustained emotional changes such as an increase in social aggression.

Other implicated structures include the subthalamic nucleus and amygdala.

### Mental processes are the end product of the interactions between elementary processing units in the brain

Our modern understanding is that specific brain regions are not responsible for specific mental faculties but instead are *elementary processing units*.

Relatedly, damage to a single area need not result in a complete loss of function; instead undamaged parts of the brain may reorganize their linkages to support the damaged area and restore the lost function (to some degree).

The highlighted finding of modularity is splint-brain patients and their modular sense of consciousness (i.e., that both hemispheres appear to have a sense of awareness).

An important challenge facing neuroscience today is that of all behaviors, higher mental processes are the most difficult to describe, to measure objectively, and to break down into elementary components.
