# PNII: Visual System II (2018-01-29, Ragsdale)
*See pnii_2018_01_29_rdm.md for RDM's take on lecture*

## Important points from last week:
- The output of the retina is different than the input because of the horizontal connections
- Retinal ganglion cells have complex, on-center-off-suround receptive fields because of this lateral inhibition

## Part I, cont.: Retinal Ganglion Cells
As you move away from the fovea, the receptive fields get bigger and sensitivity increases and acuity decreases.
Additionally, more rods contribute to the receptive field, sometimes thousands converging on a ganglion cell.

There are at least 17 types of ganglion cells.
Each conveys a distinct type of visual information, similar to cell types in the sensory system (e.g., heat versus constant pressure).

For most, we're not sure what role they play.
But, there are 3 types that are well studied (midget ganglion cells at ~70% of all RGCs, parasol ganglion cells at ~10%, and bistratified ganglion cells at ~8%).

There are three types of cones, which are tuned to respond best to distinct wavelengths.
However, you don't see any one color because of these cone types.
They're just most sensitive to the wavelengths representing each of their listed colors.
- S cones (short cones, short wavelengths like blue).
- M cones (medium cones, medium wavelengths like green).
- L cones (long cones, long wavelengths like red).

Midget ganglion cells have small receptive fields and receive inputs from red and green cones.
They signal the contrast from red and green via an opponent signal (i.e., center can be on or off, green or red, and surround will be vice versa).
Have low temporal, high spatial resolution and synapse with parvocellular layers in the LGN (via the p-pathway), involved in processing color and form.
Not motion, because of their low temporal sensitivity.

Parasol cells have larger receptive fields but have no color discrimination.
The center and surround part of their receptive fields have multiple photo receptors.
They therefore have high contrast sensitivity with high temporal, low spatial resolution.
The project to magnocellular layers in the LGN (via the m-pathway), involved in processing motion.

Bistratified cells have a blue/yellow color opponent signal (like midget ganglion cells, but for blue/yellow).
They project to koniocellular layers of the LGN (k-pathway) and are involved in color perception.

Color is encoded in the brain by the relative output of the parasol, midget, and bistratified cells.
Perception of color is therefore a combination of different "labelled lines" in the brain.


## Part II: From retina to cortex.
The axons of retinal ganglion cells project project as *optic nerves*, partially cross at the *optic chiasm* and then continue as the *optic tracts*.


#### Projections to LGN Layers
Midget and parasol ganglion cells project to six distinct layers in the lateral geniculate nucleus.
Each layer represents a separate representation of visual space.
Because of this, projections from different eyes and different cells types are segregated into distinct layers of the LGN.
Non-crossing fibers, for example, project to layers 2, 3, and 5.
m-pathway projects to layers 1 and 2, while p-pathway projects to layers 3-6.
Each layer is a physical map of the retina, preserving the retinotopic mapping seen in the retina.
k-pathway projects to cells between the LGN layers (i.e., inter-layer regions).
The cells in these inter-layer regions form the koniocellular layers.  

#### Other projections
Approximately 90% of retinal ganglion cells project to the LGN; however, 10% project to the superior colliculus, the pretectum, and the hypothalamus.
Projections to the superior colliculus involves in saccades.
The superior colliculus also makes projections to the cortex, bypassing the primary visual cortex.
Projections to the pretectum involved in pupillary reflexes.
Projections to the SCN of the hypothalamus modulate circadian rhythms.

## Part III: Visual processing in the cortex
The LGN projects to primary visual cortex through the optic radiation.
The projections are inverted such that the dorsal projections represent the bottom half of the visual world; the ventral projections represent the top half of the visual world.
There are approximately 10x more feedback projections (from V1 to LGN) than feedforward projections (from LGN to V1).

Parimary visual cortex is mainly located on the medial surface.
Brodmann area 17 is associated with primary visual cortex, is the area in and surrounding the calcarine fissure.
Primary visual cortext retains a retinotopic mapping of the external visual field.

Layer IV in primary visual cortex is the main recipient of afferent inputs from the thalamus aka LGN (the internal granule layer).
Therefore, in primary visual cortex layer IV is very large and can be divided into sublayers.

- The p-pathway projects to Layer 4CBeta; those neurons then project to layers II and III (both *blob* and *inter-blob*); then project to ventral "what" pathway.

- The m-pathway projects to Layer 4CAlpha; those neurons project to layer 4B; then those neurons project both to Layers II and III (*blob* and *inter-blob*) as well as to the dorsal "where" pathway.

- The k-pathway projects to Layers II and III (*blob* only), contributing to ventral "what" stream.

### Properties of the neurons in the cortex
- __Simple cells__ respond to bars to light in a particular orientation, if they are in the center of the cell's receptive field.
Discovered by Hubel & Wiesel, their elongated receptive fields are built from inputs of many layer IV cells.

- All different orientation possibilities are arranged into columns of neurons in the visual cortex.
This columnar organization forms complex patterns, such as spirals on the surface of the cortex.
The boundaries between these columns are not very discrete.

- In the superficial layers (II and III), the organizational scheme of columns are overlaid with *blobs*. Neurons in blobs are more responsive to color than to orientation.

- Superimposed on both blobs and orientation columns are __ocular dominance columns__. These correspond to alternating input from the ipsilateral and contralateral eyes.

- The complete set of orientation columns from a particular region of space is called a __hypercolumn__.

- __Hypercomplex cells__ provide to both orientation and length. Other cells respond best to bars of light moving in one particular direction.

### Output streams from primary visual cortex
1. The *"where"* dorsal stream, encoding location and movement.
2. The *"what"* ventral stream, encoding form and color.

__Area MT__ in the dorsal stream is particularly involved in detecting motion, shown from lesion studies.

Dorsal stream feeds forward to regions of premotor cortex, helping to guide movements.

## General ideas
- Receptive fields get larger as we go to higher levels in the visual hierarchy.

- There is a binding problem in vision: different components of vision (e.g., form, color, motion) need to be bound together to form a unified, coherent percept.
